## 5.3 Horn Formulas

In order to display human-level intelligence, a computer must be able to perform at least some modicum of logical reasoning. Horn formulas are a particular framework for doing this, for expressing logical facts and deriving conclusions.

The most primitive object in a Horn formula is a *Boolean variable*, taking value either $\texttt{true}$ or $\texttt{false}$. For instance, variables $x, y,$ and $z$ might denote the following possibilities.

$$\begin{aligned}
x &\equiv \text{the murder took place in the kitchen} \\
y &\equiv \text{the butler is innocent} \\
z &\equiv \text{the colonel was asleep at 8 pm} \\
\end{aligned}$$

A **literal** is either a variable $x$ or its negation $\bar{x}$ ("NOT $x$"). In Horn formulas, knowledge about variables is represented by two kinds of clauses:

1. **implications**, whose left-hand side is an $\text{AND}$ of any number of positive literals and whose right-hand side is a single positive literal. These express statements of the form "if the conditions on the left hold, then the one on the right must also be true." For instance,
$$(z \wedge w) \implies u$$ might mean "if the colonel was asleep at 8 pm and the murder took place at 8 pm then the colonel is innocent." A degenerate type of implication is the singleton "$\implies x$", meaning simply that $x$ is true: "the murder definitely occurred in the kitchen."

2. **pure negative clauses**, consisting of an $\text{OR}$ of any number of negative literals, as in
$$(\bar{u} \vee \bar{v} \vee \bar{y})$$ ("they can't all be innocent").

Given a set of clauses of these two types, the goal is to determine whether there is a consistent explanation: an assignment of $\texttt{true/false}$ values to the variables that satisfies all the clauses. This is also called a **satisfying assignment**.

The two kinds of clauses pull us in different directions. The implications tell us to set some of the variables to $\texttt{true}$, while the negative clauses encourage us to make them $\texttt{false}$. Our strategy for solving a Horn formula is this: We start with all variables $\texttt{false}$. We then proceed to set some of them to $\texttt{true}$, one by one, but very reluctantly, and only if we absolutely have to because an implication would otherwise be violated. Once we are done with this phase and all implications are satisfied, only then do we turn to the negative clauses and make sure they are all satisfied.

In other words, our algorithm for Horn clauses is the following greedy scheme (*stingy* is perhaps more descriptive):

```python
def Horn_solver():
  """
  Input: a Horn formula
  Output: a satisfying assignment, if one exists
  """

  set all variables to false

  while there is an implication that is not satisfied:
    set the right-hand variable of the implication to true

  if all pure negative clauses are satisfied:
    return the assignment
  else:
    return 'formula is not satisfiable'
```

For instance, suppose the formula is
$$(w \wedge y \wedge z) \implies x, (x \wedge z) \implies w, x \implies y, \implies x, (x \wedge y) \implies w, (\bar{w} \vee \bar{x} \vee \bar{y}), (\bar{z}).$$

We start with everything false and then notice that x must be true on account of the singleton implication $\implies x$. Then we see that $y$ must also be true, because of $x \implies y$. And so on.

 To see why the algorithm is correct, notice that if it returns an assignment, this assign- ment satisfies both the implications and the negative clauses, and so it is indeed a satisfying truth assignment of the input Horn formula. So we only have to convince ourselves that if the algorithm finds no satisfying assignment, then there really is none. This is so because our "stingy" rule maintains the following invariant:

 * If a certain set of variables is set to $\texttt{true}$, then they must be $\texttt{true}$ in *any* satisfying assignment.

 Hence, if the truth assignment found after the *while* loop does not satisfy the negative clauses, there can be no satisfying truth assignment.

 Horn formulas lie at the heart of Prolog ("programming by logic"), a language in which you program by specifying desired properties of the output, using simple logical expressions. The workhorse of Prolog interpreters is our greedy satisfiability algorithm. Conveniently, it can be implemented in time linear in the length of the formula; do you see how (Exercise 5.32)?
