## 0.1 Books and Algorithms

Two ideas changed the world.

In 1448 in the German city of Mainz a goldsmith named [Johann Gutenberg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Gutenberg) discovered a way to print books by putting together movable metallic pieces.

Literacy spread, the Dark Ages ended, the human intellect was liberated, science and technology triumphed, the Industrial Revolution happened. Many historians say we owe all this to typography. Imagine a world in which only an elite could read these lines!

But others insist that the key development was not typography, but *algorithms*.

Today we are so used to writing numbers in decimal, that it is easy to forget that Gutenberg would write the number 1448 as $\text{MCDXLVIII}$. How do you add two Roman numerals? What is $\text{MCDXLVIII} + \text{DCCCXII}$? (And just try to think about multiplying them.)

Even a clever man like Gutenberg probably only knew how to add and subtract small numbers using his fingers; for anything more complicated he had to consult an abacus specialist.

The decimal system, invented in India around AD 600, was a revolution in quantitative reasoning: using only 10 symbols, even very large numbers could be written down compactly, and arithmetic could be done efficiently on them by following elementary steps.

Nonetheless these ideas took a long time to spread, hindered by traditional barriers of language, distance, and ignorance.

The most influential medium of transmission turned out to be a textbook, written in Arabic in the ninth century by a man who lived in Baghdad. [Al Khwarizmi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_ibn_Musa_al-Khwarizmi) laid out the basic methods for adding, multiplying, and dividing numbers—even extracting square roots and calculating digits of $\pi$.

These procedures were precise, unambiguous, mechanical, efficient, correct—in short, they were algorithms, a term coined to honor the wise man after the decimal system was finally adopted in Europe, many centuries later.

Since then, this decimal positional system and its numerical algorithms have played an enormous role in Western civilization. They enabled science and technology; they accelerated industry and commerce.

And when, much later, the computer was finally designed, it explicitly embodied the positional system in its bits and words and arithmetic unit. Scientists everywhere then got busy developing more and more complex algorithms for all kinds of problems and inventing novel applications—ultimately changing the world.
