## 1.1 Basic Arithmetic

### 1.1.1 Addition

We were so young when we learned the standard technique for addition that we would scarcely have thought to ask *why* it works. But let’s go back now and take a closer look.

It is a basic property of decimal numbers that

* *The sum of any three single-digit numbers is at most two digits long.*

Quick check: the sum is at most $9 + 9 + 9 = 27$, two digits long. In fact, this rule holds not just in decimal but in *any* base $b \geq 2$ (Exercise 1.1). In binary, for instance, the maximum possible sum of three single-bit numbers is $3$, which is a $2$-bit number.

This simple rule gives us a way to add two numbers in any base: align their right-hand ends, and then perform a single right-to-left pass in which the sum is computed digit by digit, maintaining the overflow as a carry. Since we know each individual sum is a two-digit number, *the carry is always a single digit*, and so at any given step, three single-digit numbers are added. Here’s an example showing the addition $53 + 35$ in binary.

$$\begin{matrix}
\text{Carry:} & 1 &   &   & 1 & 1 & 1 &   &      \\
              &   & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 1 & (53) \\
              & + & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 & (35) \\
              & - & - & - & - & - & - & - & (35) \\
              & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & (88) \\
\end{matrix}$$

Ordinarily we would spell out the algorithm in pseudocode, but in this case it is so familiar that we do not repeat it. Instead we move straight to analyzing its efficiency.

*Given two binary numbers $x$ and $y$, how long does our algorithm take to add them?* This is the kind of question we shall persistently be asking throughout this book. We want the answer expressed as a function of *the size of the input*: the number of bits of $x$ and $y$, the number of keystrokes needed to type them in.

Suppose $x$ and $y$ are each $n$ bits long; in this chapter we will consistently use the letter $n$ for the sizes of numbers. Then the sum of $x$ and $y$ is $n + 1$ bits at most, and each individual bit of this sum gets computed in a fixed amount of time.

The total running time for the addition algorithm is therefore of the form $c_0 + c_1 n$, where $c_0$ and $c_1$ are some constants; in other words, it is linear. Instead of worrying about the precise values of $c_0$ and $c_1$, we will focus on the big picture and denote the running time as $O(n)$.

Now that we have a working algorithm whose running time we know, our thoughts wander inevitably to the question of whether there is something even better.

*Is there a faster algorithm?* (This is another persistent question.)

For addition, the answer is easy: in order to add two $n$-bit numbers we must at least read them and write down the answer, and even that requires $n$ operations. So the addition algorithm is optimal, up to multiplicative constants!

Some readers may be confused at this point: Why $O(n)$ operations? Isn’t binary addition something that computers today perform by just one instruction? There are two answers.

First, it is certainly true that in a single instruction we can add integers whose size in bits is within the *word length* of today’s computers—$32$ perhaps. But, as will become apparent later in this chapter, it is often useful and necessary to handle numbers much larger than this, perhaps several thousand bits long. Adding and multiplying such large numbers on real computers is very much like performing the operations bit by bit.

Second, when we want to understand algorithms, it makes sense to study even the basic algorithms that are encoded in the hardware of today’s computers. In doing so, we shall focus on the *bit complexity* of the algorithm, the number of elementary operations on individual bits—because this accounting reflects the amount of hardware, transistors and wires, necessary for implementing the algorithm.

&nbsp;


### 1.1.2 Multiplication and Division

Onward to multiplication! The grade-school algorithm for multiplying two numbers $x$ and $y$ is to create an array of intermediate sums, each representing the product of $x$ by a single digit of $y$. These values are appropriately left-shifted and then added up. Suppose for instance that we want to multiply $13 \times 11$, or in binary notation, $x = 1101$ and $y = 1011$. The multiplication would proceed thus.

$$\begin{array}{l}
  &   &   &        & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & \\
  &   &   & \times & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & \\
- & - & - &      - & - & - & - & - & \\
  &   &   &        & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & \text{($1101$ times $1$, shifted by $0$)} \\
  &   &   &      1 & 1 & 0 & 1 &   & \text{($1101$ times $1$, shifted by $1$)} \\
  &   & 0 &      0 & 0 & 0 &   &   & \text{($1101$ times $0$, shifted by $2$)} \\
+ & 1 & 1 &      0 & 1 &   &   &   & \text{($1101$ times $1$, shifted by $3$)} \\
- & - & - &      - & - & - & - & - & \\
1 & 0 & 0 &      0 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & \text{(binary $143$)} \\
\end{array}$$

In binary this is particularly easy since each intermediate row is either zero or $x$ itself, left-shifted an appropriate amount of times. Also notice that left-shifting is just a quick way to multiply by the base, which in this case is $2$. (Likewise, the effect of a right shift is to divide by the base, rounding down if needed.)

The correctness of this multiplication procedure is the subject of Exercise 1.6; let’s move on and figure out how long it takes. If $x$ and $y$ are both $n$ bits, then there are $n$ intermediate rows, with lengths of up to $2n$ bits (taking the shifting into account). The total time taken to add up these rows, doing two numbers at a time, is
$$\underbrace{O(n) + O(n) + \cdots + O(n)}_{\text{$n - 1$ times}},$$

which is $O(n^2)$, *quadratic* in the size of the inputs: still polynomial but much slower than addition (as we have all suspected since elementary school).

But Al Khwarizmi knew another way to multiply, a method which is used today in some European countries. To multiply two decimal numbers $x$ and $y$, write them next to each other, as in the example below. Then repeat the following: divide the first number by $2$, rounding down the result (that is, dropping the $.5$ if the number was odd), and double the second number. Keep going till the first number gets down to $1$. Then strike out all the rows in which the first number is even, and add up whatever remains in the second column.

$$\begin{array}{l}
11 &  13 & \\
 5 &  26 & \\
 2 &  52 & \text{(strike out)} \\
 1 & 104 & \\
 - &   - & \\
   & 143 & \text{(answer)}     \\
\end{array}$$

But if we now compare the two algorithms, binary multiplication and multiplication by re- peated halvings of the multiplier, we notice that they are doing the same thing! The three numbers added in the second algorithm are precisely the multiples of $13$ by powers of $2$ that were added in the binary method.

Only this time $11$ was not given to us explicitly in binary, and so we had to extract its binary representation by looking at the parity of the numbers obtained from it by successive divisions by $2$. Al Khwarizmi’s second algorithm is a fascinating mixture of decimal and binary!


**Figure 1.1** Multiplication à la Français.

```python
def multiply(x, y):
  """
  Input: two n-bit integers x and y, where y ≥ 0
  Output: their product
  """

  if y = 0: return 0

  z = multiple(x, ⌊y / 2⌋)
  if y is even:
    return 2z
  else:
    return 2z + x
```

The same algorithm can thus be repackaged in different ways. For variety we adopt a third formulation, the recursive algorithm of Figure 1.1, which directly implements the rule

$$x \cdot y = \begin{cases}  
2(x \cdot \lfloor y / 2 \rfloor)     & \text{if $y$ is even} \\
2(x \cdot \lfloor y / 2 \rfloor) + x & \text{if $y$ is odd}  \\
\end{cases}$$

&nbsp;

*Is this algorithm correct?* The preceding recursive rule is transparently correct; so checking the correctness of the algorithm is merely a matter of verifying that it mimics the rule and that it handles the base case $(y = 0)$ properly.

*How long does the algorithm take?* It must terminate after $n$ recursive calls, because at each call $y$ is halved—that is, its number of bits is decreased by one. And each recursive call requires these operations: a division by $2$ (right shift); a test for odd / even (looking up the last bit); a multiplication by $2$ (left shift); and possibly one addition, a total of $O(n)$ bit operations. The total time taken is thus $O(n^2)$, just as before.

*Can we do better?* Intuitively, it seems that multiplication requires adding about $n$ multiples of one of the inputs, and we know that each addition is linear, so it would appear that $n^2$ bit operations are inevitable. Astonishingly, in Chapter 2 we’ll see that we can do significantly better!

&nbsp;

Division is next. To divide an integer $x$ by another integer $y \neq 0$ means to find a quotient $q$ and a remainder $r$, where $x = yq + r$ and $r < y$. We show the recursive version of division in Figure 1.2; like multiplication, it takes quadratic time. The analysis of this algorithm is the subject of Exercise 1.8.

&nbsp;

> **Bases and Logs**
>
> Naturally, there is nothing special about the number $10$—we just happen to have 10 fingers, and so $10$ was an obvious place to pause and take counting to the next level. The Mayans developed a similar positional system based on the number $20$ (no shoes, see?). And of course today computers represent numbers in binary.
>
> How many digits are needed to represent the number $N \geq 0$ in base $b$? Let’s see—with $k$ digits in base $b$ we can express numbers up to $b^k - 1$; for instance, in decimal, three digits get us all the way up to $999 = 103 - 1$. By solving for $k$, we find that $\lceil log_{b}{(N + 1)} \rceil$ digits (about $\log_{b}{N}$ digits, give or take $1$) are needed to write $N$ in base $b$.
>
> How much does the size of a number change when we change bases? Recall the rule for converting logarithms from base $a$ to base $b$: $\log_{b}{N} = (\log_{a}{N}) / (\log_{a}{b})$. So the size of integer $N$ in base $a$ is the same as its size in base $b$, times a constant factor $\log_{a}{b}$. In big-$O$ notation, therefore, the base is irrelevant, and we write the size simply as $O(\log{N})$. When we do not specify a base, as we almost never will, we mean $\log_{2}{N}$.
>
> Incidentally, this function $\log{N}$ appears repeatedly in our subject, in many guises. Here's a sampling:
> 1. $\log{N}$ is, of course, the power to which you need to raise $2$ in order to obtain $N$ .
> 2. Going backward, it can also be seen as the number of times you must halve $N$ to get down to $1$. (More precisely: $\lceil \log{N} \rceil$.) This is useful when a number is halved at each iteration of an algorithm, as in several examples later in the chapter.
> 3. It is the number of bits in the binary representation of $N$ . (More precisely: $\lceil \log{(N + 1)} \rceil$.)
> 4. It is also the depth of a complete binary tree with $N$ nodes. (More precisely: $\lfloor \log{N} \rfloor$.)
> 5. It is even the sum $1 + 1 + 1 + \cdots + \frac{1}{N}$, to within a constant factor (Exercise 1.5).
